>>LISA GARR: Hello and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Some of the greatest
challenges of our time
can be understood by looking at
our past social patterns that
got us into where we
are as a society today.
So by looking at our history we
can better change our future.
Joining me today
is Riane Eisler.
She is a pioneer, a futurist.
She is an expert in the
study of complex systems
and making them very simple
for us to understand.
She's been recognized as one
of the top 20 macrohistorians
in the world, and has
written about new systems
for change in her iconic books,
"The Real Wealth of Nations"
and "The Chalice and the Blade."
Welcome to the show.
Thank you so much for
joining me, Riane.
>>RIANE EISLER: It's a great
pleasure to be with you, Lisa.
>>LISA: It is my honor
to have you here.
And I am so looking forward
to speaking with you
on a female to female level.
I have so many questions.
But first, I want
you to share with us
a little bit about
your past and how
you have come to
understand your past
and pretty much how it propelled
you to creating as much
change as you have.
Tell me a little bit
about where you grew up.
>>EISLER: Well, as
you know, in my work
I introduce two new
classifications for society--
what I call a domination system
and a partnership system.
And I was born in
Europe, in Vienna,
at a time of massive
regression to the domination
side of what's
really a continuum.
It's always a matter of degree.
It was the rise to
power of the Nazis,
first in Germany, and
then my native Austria.
So that from day to the
next, my parents and I,
we became hunted
with license to kill.
And I was a very small child.
>>LISA: How old
were you when you
started to realize
what was happening?
>>EISLER: Well, I
was six years old.
>>LISA: Six.
>>EISLER: And it was Crystal
Night, which was so-called
because of all the
glass that was shattered
in Jewish homes and
businesses and synagogues,
when a gang of Gestapo
men broke into our home
and dragged my father away.
And I saw that night, of
course, cruelty, violence.
But I also saw
something else that
had a profound influence on me.
And it's what I today
call spiritual courage.
>>LISA: Today you call it that.
But back when you
were watching that,
it's amazing how
impactful that would
have been to a
six-year-old child,
and where you've come
today, what you've
done by teaching so many people
about what you experienced
at that pivotal
moment in your life,
about the domination
versus the partnership.
Explain a little bit about that.
>>EISLER: Well, let
me first tell you
who exemplified
spiritual courage for me.
It was my mother.
And she recognized
one of the Gestapo men
as a young man who had worked
for the family business
as an errand boy.
And she got furious.
She said, how dare you
do this to this man who
has been so kind to you.
I want him back.
Now, she could have been killed.
Many people were
killed that night.
But by a miracle, she wasn't.
And by a miracle, we escaped.
But you know, I call
it spiritual courage
because we think of
courage-- we talk
you know, it's courage to slay
the dragon, kill the enemy.
But spiritual courage
is what she displayed
to stand up against
injustice, out of love.
And in many ways that's
what my work is about.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: And it's really
to answer questions
that arose very
early for me about
does it have to be in this way?
When we have such a capacity
for caring, for empathy,
for love-- what I
saw in my mother--
why has there been
so much cruelty,
violence, destructiveness?
And--
>>LISA: It existed way
before that time period,
and it has existed since then.
>>EISLER: That's right.
So I eventually-- eventually
it was these questions about,
does it have to be this way
or is there an alternative,
that led to my search
for an alternative.
And I didn't find it by using
the conventional categories--
right, left,
religious, secular--
>>LISA: Education.
>>EISLER: Well,
Eastern or Western,
for that matter--
all the categories
that we're so used to.
Because none of them describe,
really-- none of them
answer that question.
You can have terrible
regimes on either side.
And so that my first book
"The Chalice and the Blade"
really drew from this
multidisciplinary,
cross-cultural research.
And then, as you know, I
wrote many other books--
>>LISA: Many, yes.
>>EISLER: --applying the
partnership and domination
lenses to various areas,
including, as you just said,
education.
>>LISA: Yes, which is
a great place to start.
And there was an entire DVD
that you did, which is great.
And we're going to
see clips of that
today, from
"Tomorrow's Children."
And it really exemplifies the
explanation between partnership
and, well, domination.
We're going to take at
that clip really quick,
so we could see it in the DVD.
Take a look.
>>EISLER: This distinction
between the partnership
and dominator models
comes out of my research
over three decades,
multi-disciplinary research
looking at a large span of
our cultural evolution that
is reported, in part, in my book
"The Chalice and the Blade."
This research addresses
fundamental questions
that many of us have asked,
questions that in my life
came out of my experiences
as a little girl
in Nazi Austria,
questions such as do we
have to hunt and
persecute each other?
When we humans have such an
enormous capacity for caring,
for creativity, what is it
that has tilted us back?
Don't we have any
alternatives to this way
that is so often presented to
us as just the way things are?
Out of this research
the answer came, yes.
We do have alternatives.
But we cannot see these
alternatives unless we look
at human history
through a wider lens.
What we begin to see is that
societies-- whether they're
ancient or modern, Eastern
or Western-- that orient more
to the dominator model, we
see that the primary principle
for organizing relations is
ranking-- man over woman,
man over man, race over
race, nation over nation,
man over nature.
But as you move more towards
the partnership model,
you begin to see a different
governing principle: linking.
There are still hierarchies.
There are still very clear
lines of responsibility
and leadership, but leadership
is not based on the power
to dominate, to control
through fear, through force.
It is not disempowering,
but empowering.
>>LISA: Yes, and leadership
can be empowering.
But right now in our
education system,
it appears that it
is very challenged.
And we've heard this
for a while now.
How do you think
that this is being
used, the domination
versus partnership model,
in education?
>>EISLER: Well, the
so-called No Child
Left Behind has really been
a symptom of regression,
again, to the domination side.
Because what does it really do?
It ranks us again, doesn't it?
>>LISA: The testing, yes.
>>EISLER: Yeah,
and it humiliates.
It humiliates teachers and
schools that don't perform.
Well, the truth of the
matter is that children
learn when they're engaged.
Children learn when
they're cared for.
Children learn when there
is that sense that there is
somebody that they're
with-- a teacher, a parent--
>>LISA: A partner.
>>EISLER: --who
really respects them,
who treats them as a
partner, not as just somebody
to tell regurgitate, repeat to
me, what I've just taught you.
So I'm afraid that
a lot of this,
under the guise of reform,
has actually been regression.
>>LISA: The opposite.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
Now, we know what
needs to be done.
And my book,
"Tomorrow's Children,"
includes really proven
methods that we know work.
>>LISA: Yes, and they're
very good methods.
And I was in school,
I went through that,
where I just had
to regurgitate it.
And we took the tests.
And we were scored on the tests.
And it was nothing that I
could relate to at a young age.
School for me was
not as easy as I
thought it was for other people.
But yet, the other
people were experiencing
the same thing I was.
Now I look at my
daughter, who's nine,
going through school
these days, and she
has teachers who
act as partners.
But they still then have
to take the testing.
So there's kind of a
double message there.
>>EISLER: Well, it's made
it very hard for teachers.
Most teachers, if you
talk to them, they'll say,
this is a diversion.
Of course, we need to have some
standards, some evaluation.
But the evaluation
shouldn't be like grading
on the curve, where somebody
has to be on the bottom
and somebody's on top.
That's pure domination teaching.
It should be what kind of
progress is this child making?
How is this child talented?
Maybe it isn't so much in this
area, but maybe it's in art.
Maybe it's-- in other words,
educata means to elicit,
rather than to cram down.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Everywhere that
we go, though, we
experience this domination
model-- in our government,
in our systems, wherever we go--
when you get in an airplane.
It's all top down philosophies,
everywhere you go.
>>EISLER: Well and yet,
we have moved, very much,
from much more rigid
domination times to today.
What we have is a very uneasy
mix of partnership elements
and domination elements.
And if you look at
modern history, which
I've done through my
work, you actually
see something very interesting.
You see that every single
progressive modern movement
has challenged a
tradition of domination.
>>LISA: Yes, this is true.
>>EISLER: Whether it was
the so-called rights of man
movement, or the women's
movement, or the abolitionists
and civil rights
movement-- these supposedly
divinely ordained rankings.
>>LISA: Even the
Occupy movement.
>>EISLER: Well, absolutely.
Or the environmental movement,
challenging the once hallowed
conquest of nature.
So what we're really
talking about here
is understanding
what needs to change.
And that's what this
work has been about.
And as I said in the video
that you just showed,
we have to look at areas-- we
have to think outside the box.
Because usually, when we're
talking about society,
we don't talk about how
women fair in society, even
though we're half
of the population.
>>LISA: More than half.
>>EISLER: More than half.
We don't talk about how that
affects our system of values.
We don't talk about how
children are treated,
whether it is partnership
care giving or dominator
care giving.
We hear a lot about
respect, but in domination
systems, it's fear, isn't it?
>>LISA: Yes, yes, yes.
>>EISLER: Respect
has to go both ways.
>>LISA: I remember
there was a quote
that I read that if
women ruled the world,
they would never send
their sons to war.
Because no mama wants
to see her baby killed.
>>EISLER: And yet, women have
been socialized, just like men,
to fit into domination systems.
In Iran, for example,
women actually
were asked to send their
children into the minefields
ahead of the army during
the war with Iraq.
And they did.
Because they were told
that their children would
immediately ascend
to heaven as martyrs.
So you have to really
consider that this is not
a question of anything
inherent in women or men.
It is really a question of what
kind of a system do we build.
And we have a lot
of evidence showing
that partnership systems
have existed, do exist,
and that they work better.
>>LISA: And that
they thrive, yes.
>>EISLER: That they thrive.
But we have to bring
that information out.
Because it isn't.
>>LISA: Yes, no
that's very true.
Especially-- I'm going to go
back to the education system
here for a minute,
because there's
another clip I wanted to show
about what Riane was talking
about earlier, about
our education system
and how it is a conveyor
belt system of running kids
through the mill of
an education system.
Take a look at this.
>>EISLER: If you
look at the picture
that we get about schools
from the popular culture,
from television, where young
people, students, are moved
on a conveyor belt from class
to class, from grade to grade,
really like a factory, a place
where education is something
that is done to students,
rather than with students.
We all know that,
for real learning,
young people need to
be actively engaged.
>>LISA: Yes, actively engaged
is very, very important.
>>EISLER: Actively engaged.
>>LISA: So how does
this type of thing
address violence in schools?
>>EISLER: Well, in
domination systems,
where you have this ranking,
people grow up with this notion
that there are only
two alternatives:
you either dominant
or you're dominated.
So war, the war of the sexes--
they're built into the system.
And violence is, of
course, the ultimate way
that domination systems
maintain themselves,
whether it's in the
family, whether it's
in gender relations,
whether it's
in national or
international relations.
>>LISA: I see.
>>EISLER: So you can't
just tack on nonviolence
to a fundamentally
imbalanced system.
You have to understand
that we really
need really fundamental change.
And the movement today
against bullying,
for example-- that's a sign of
movement towards partnership.
Because it used to be accepted.
>>LISA: Yes, there's a lot of
awareness being raised now.
>>EISLER: Yes,
which is wonderful.
>>LISA: I just saw a
DVD on-- it was released
and it was shot by a
child, a nine-year-old.
And he showed, from
his experience,
of what it felt
like to be bullied.
And it went viral.
Very interesting-- so that
is how it's starting to work,
where the partnership
model is starting
to become a lot more supported.
And it has a lot to
do with awareness.
>>EISLER: Well, there's
always awareness,
because from awareness
then flows action.
And the more changes we
make-- not only in ourselves,
OK, but in the cultural
structures, in the values,
in the relationships,
which are all
interconnected-- the more then
our awareness that something
better is possible also comes.
So it's an interactive process.
I wrote a book called
"The Power of Partnership"
basically on that subject.
And it really is very useful.
I use it in-- I
teach leadership,
transformative leadership.
>>LISA: Thank God.
You teach leadership, yes.
>>EISLER: And that's one
of the texts that we use.
Because it's so
very down to earth.
And it really deals with how we
relate to everything, including
ourselves.
>>LISA: We do actually
have another clip here
of the violence in schools
and violence in education.
And it explains
the system of what
Riane is talking about in this.
Take a look.
>>EISLER: If we
really think about it,
every curriculum is woven
around a particular conceptual
framework, around basic
assumptions, assumptions
that are then communicated
through the curriculum,
assumptions about what is valued
or not valued in a society.
Fortunately, we already
have quite a few partnership
elements in the curriculum.
But unfortunately, we
also have many elements
that we have inherited
from earlier times that
orient it more to
the dominator model.
For example, we tell
kids don't be violent.
But what are the dates that
we ask them to memorize?
The dates of wars.
So aren't we really
teaching young people
that if you want to get into a
history book, go kill somebody?
Aren't we really
perpetuating the values
that we don't want
to perpetuate?
And the problem is that
this is so imbalanced,
because so little
attention in the curriculum
is given to nonviolently
achieved gains,
the social reforms
to which we owe just
about all the good
things in our lives.
If we don't want young people
to be alienated and apathetic,
we need to show them that
nonviolent change is possible
and that they can
make it happen.
>>LISA: How do you
take a situation that
is as vast as bullying in
schools and really change it?
How do you make that real
social change happen?
>>EISLER: Well, it
isn't just one thing
ever that makes for a change.
There's some excellent
programs, by the way,
now that schools are using.
My-- I have a number of
wonderful grandchildren,
and my 11-year-old grandchild--
he's a wonderful boy.
He is one of the people who is
in one of those in his school.
They have that program.
And it's a public school.
And by the way, public
schools are not failing.
There are just some public
schools that are failing.
And I have to say
that the charter
schools, on the surface, look
like they're doing better.
But that's because they
select whom to admit.
>>LISA: Yes, that's true.
>>EISLER: And so let's
not go in that direction.
>>LISA: OK, OK.
>>EISLER: OK, but let
me get back to this--
so the kids are learning that
bullying isn't acceptable.
>>LISA: Now, I
agree with you-- I'm
sorry to interrupt--
about the public schools,
is that it has actually caused
more emphasis on the parents
helping and participating
in their child's education,
because the government
support has been
so diminished, that
the parents really
have taken a larger
role in education.
They're assisting
in the classroom.
They're creating
parent-run organizations
that support the kids, with
the music programs and art.
It's really, actually,
been a nice backlash.
>>EISLER: Well, the problem
is that this is all right.
And it's wonderful in the
sense for middle class
and upper middle class
families, but, you
know, lower middle
class families,
poor families-- they're
working two jobs.
>>LISA: True.
>>EISLER: They don't have
the time, the energy,
or the knowledge.
Because so many of
them have learned
parenting as you tell
your kid what to do
and you slap the kid.
And of course, what are we
teaching a child if we do that?
We're teaching a child
that it's OK for somebody
to impose their will
through violence.
That's the lesson.
>>LISA: Domination again.
>>EISLER: Domination, again.
So I think that what we
really have to look at
is not so much what the
individual parent does,
but what are the circumstances,
the social conditions.
And that's really where
we come to an area
that I'm working on
very, very much now,
which is social policy, and
especially economic policy.
>>LISA: When you really get
into these individual systems,
where it's economics-- or
I mean, if it's education,
or if it is economics,
or if it is social,
it's all interconnected,
as you're explaining here.
It's all interconnected.
>>EISLER: Yeah, we're
taught such a fragmented
way of looking at things,
like religious or secular.
What kind of religion?
What kind of secularism?
Is it partnership or is
it domination oriented?
Or Eastern or Western?
A colleague of mine calls
these old categories weapons
of mass distraction.
>>LISA: Distraction, yes.
>>EISLER: Because
they really are.
They fragment our consciousness.
And as you say,
our consciousness
is constantly fragmented.
And this approach is really
about connecting the dots.
>>LISA: I see,
that's what you've
done with all of your work.
>>EISLER: Yes, that is
what my work is about.
>>LISA: Yes, I could see that.
Between "The Real Wealth
of Nations" and then
"The Chalice and the
Blade" started it.
And "Real Wealth of Nations"
address the economy.
And then it goes into the
school system and the education,
with "Tomorrow's Children,"
and the partnership model.
I completely see how it
is all interconnected.
You're smiling because I-- yes.
>>EISLER: Well, I'm
smiling because I realized,
down the road
someplace-- when I wrote
"The Chalice and the
Blade," it was about power.
Because the chalice
and the blade
symbolize two very
different kinds of power.
There's nothing
wrong with power.
But is it going to be
the blade, the power
to dominate, to destroy?
>>LISA: Oh, I'm so
glad you said that.
Yes, that's a very
good distinction.
>>EISLER: Or is it the power
of the chalice, the power
to give life, not to take it,
to nurture, to illuminate life.
And then the next book
I wrote was about sex--
>>LISA: That came in there?
Oh, it came in, right.
>>EISLER: "Sacred Pleasure."
And then of course, the last one
is economics, which is money,
so it's really a trilogy
on power, sex, and money.
But it was funny.
I realized it after I wrote
"The Real Wealth of Nations."
I thought, well,
those are really
the most important
levers, aren't they?
>>LISA: Well, it's
absolutely true.
Because sex has
been used, as you--
I took this from your
book, "Sacred Pleasure"--
has been used to form humanity
in societies for decades,
centuries.
>>EISLER: Well, the whole
idea that sex is bad
and that woman is a
temptress to man--
that absolutely-- look, if man
can't trust half of humanity--
everybody has a mother.
And if you can't even trust
that half of humanity,
you can't trust anybody.
And mistrust is
part of also what
keeps domination systems going.
But there's very good reason
to mistrust in those systems.
It isn't our imagination.
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
We've seen evidence.
>>EISLER: Yeah,
it's the evidence.
So yeah, and education.
Always education, whether
it's formal education
or informal education
through the media.
We've got to pay a lot
of attention to that.
And that's why I wrote
"Tomorrow's Children."
>>LISA: And we're
going to touch on that,
which is very, very important.
Media, as you said, is
a form of education.
>>EISLER: Yes.
>>LISA: It does.
It shapes and forms the
way that we-- our behaviors
as a society,
societal behaviors.
>>EISLER: But so are
fairy tales education.
So is religion education.
What does a girl take away
from stories like Cinderella--
>>LISA: Princess--
>>EISLER: --or Sleeping Beauty.
>>LISA: --rescuer.
>>EISLER: That's right.
She's helpless.
>>LISA: She's a victim.
>>EISLER: She can't do anything.
It's ridiculous.
But also--
>>LISA: She has to be saved.
>>EISLER: She has to be saved.
But not only that-- we are
still idealizing rankings.
Everybody's a king, a prince.
Those are the good people.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>EISLER: It's so subtle.
>>LISA: That's true.
I didn't think
about it that way.
>>EISLER: It's so subtle.
And it's fascinating.
The work that I do is really
like a Sherlock Holmes
kind of--
>>LISA: You're a detective.
>>EISLER: Yes, a detective.
Because a lot of things
that don't seem to make
sense suddenly
start making sense.
>>LISA: That everything is
based on this domination
versus partnership model,
everywhere you look.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
And we've inherited.
This is what we
have to remember.
If you look at the
European Middle Ages,
they looked like the
Taliban, didn't they--
the Inquisition, the Crusades,
the holy war, the jihad.
Women were nothing--
witch burnings,
whether you slowly stone a woman
to death or burn her to death.
>>LISA: They're not leaders.
They were not leaders, yes.
>>EISLER: We have moved forward.
We have moved to the
partnership side,
but always against
enormous resistance
and periodic regression.
So it's like a spiral
upward movement with dips.
And we're in a dip now.
And I thought we would
be out of it already.
But we haven't been.
So it's up to us.
It's really up to us.
>>LISA: In a
microcosm way, though,
don't we go from
the dips to the--
don't we constantly
spiral as a society?
Don't we go from the
hills to the valleys?
Don't we always do that?
>>EISLER: To some extent.
But I don't think that we
need to continue to do this.
I know that that's part
of Hindu philosophy,
that there are these cycles.
I don't see history that way.
Because we started--
the original direction
of civilization, as I document
in "The Chalice and the Blade,"
was more in a
partnership direction.
And then came the shift.
And now, we're trying
to shift again--
>>LISA: Well the shift was maybe
a bit of a backlash, though.
>>EISLER: to the
partnership side.
>>LISA: Do you think that the
shift was a bit of a backlash?
>>EISLER: Well the
shift, I think--
there are many theories.
But I subscribe to the
climate change and invasions
theory, that in the more
fertile areas of the globe,
where if you will, the Earth
was a good mother, the more
partnership-- never perfect,
never perfect, never ideal--
but less violent, more
egalitarian direction.
In the more fringe and
inhospitable areas,
you got more of the
domination system.
And during a period of
enormous climate change, which
has been aridification,
desertification-- you know,
the Sahara was
once very fertile.
Did you know that?
>>LISA: No, I did not.
>>EISLER: Oh, we're not taught
the most interesting things
about our history.
But during this period, these
hoards began to encroach.
And there was this shift, even
in the more civilized areas.
So now of course-- and
also recorded history.
There has been, what you
said, this tension constantly
between these two-- in terms of
the language of chaos theory,
of nonlinear
dynamics-- attractors,
really, the partnership system
and the domination system.
But in modern
history, as I said,
all the progressive
modern movements
have challenged
traditions of domination.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: So we have been
movement to the partnership
side with regressions.
So when I sometimes
joke about it,
I said, when I get depressed,
I think of the European Middle
Ages.
Because we have moved forward.
>>LISA: Yes, we have.
>>EISLER: We would be killed
for this conversation just a few
hundred years ago.
>>LISA: You are
absolutely right.
>>EISLER: For even thinking
it, much less saying it.
>>LISA: On a public forum--
absolutely, you are right.
That is a great perspective.
Well, so what we need are
more models of how to be,
more models of partnership.
We've definitely got the
model of the dominance.
So we see that.
And we see how we want
to move away from that.
But what we need
to see is models
of how to move towards
it, to visually
see that working in our
communities, in our schools,
in our societies, in our
economy-- absolutely.
That's what we need to see.
There's actually
a clip here, which
is a really good one,
about-- I love this.
This is back to the
education system,
on how children teach
what they learn,
right there in the classroom.
Take a look at this.
>>DAVE KETTER: I make it
a point, as a teacher,
to never do for
students what I think
they can do for themselves.
It's quite important for us,
as teachers, to get students
talking to each other,
and not just the teacher
talking to the group or the
group talking to the teacher
and answering questions.
And pair teaching is a
major aspect of that.
>>JOSH BREWER: So in
the systems class,
specifically, we have
had this thing where
a student or a group of
students will take home
a packet or a
chapter or something
that they've
researched on their own
and bring it back into the
class and present it and be
the teacher of that class
for 10 minutes or a day.
At some point we'll get to that.
I think that's really
helpful because you're
getting a different
viewpoint than you would--
you're not having
the same person
or two people present every day.
So hearing things from
a different voice,
from a different person,
with their influence in it,
it is really helpful.
>>MURIEL MONTGOMERY: I think
you'd learn more this way
because, instead of being
subjected to one point of view,
like the teacher talking
and you listening,
it's the teacher
bouncing off ideas
and the students bouncing off
ideas off of other students.
And so instead of hearing
one view, you get, like, 10.
Just socially, you get
interaction with other people
and, like, learn how to
politely receive ideas.
If I see somebody who's not
talking, maybe open their mouth
and act like they're
about to talk,
I don't say anything if
I've been saying things.
I see that a lot, just
courtesy in conversation.
People encourage other kids
who haven't spoken to speak.
And I think that's really
neat because in more
traditional classrooms
that I've been in,
that's not the case at all.
>>LISA: That's a great
example of a model
that-- where does that
school exist, by the way.
I looked it up.
I couldn't--
>>EISLER: The Nova School.
It was a so-called alternative.
And see, this is the problem.
All these models exist,
but they're marginalized.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: And our job
is to really bring them
into the mainstream.
>>LISA: I saw that
that was in Florida,
but I'd love to bring--
>>EISLER: No, no, no.
That school, actually--
there were a number
of schools in that DVD
of "Tomorrow's Children."
The high school is in Seattle.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
>>LISA: Great.
I was wondering.
That's an amazing,
amazing school.
>>EISLER: Oh, it's
a wonderful school.
But see, the models exist.
And they work.
>>LISA: The curriculum exists
and it's even in your books.
>>EISLER: And the point of
it is-- is to, as I said,
make this information known.
Change the conversation.
>>LISA: The curriculum
actually exists
with your organization,
doesn't it?
>>EISLER: We have a great
many resources at the Center
for Partnership Studies website,
which is partnershipway.org,
on all kinds of things,
and certainly on education.
So I really want to
invite our viewers
to avail themselves
of them and--
>>LISA: Yes, and how
to raise young leaders
and young learners.
And yes, and how to really
change the education model.
It's being done.
And then you have--
your organization
has put together a wonderful
curriculum and resources
and so forth for it to be
able to be carried forth
to many different
school systems.
And I'm very, very
glad that you did that.
That is, in my view, putting
this conversation into action.
And it's making real change.
It's giving people practical
tools to make this to happen.
Because we as parents want
to see our children having
those options, getting
away from-- this
is the generation,
and the ones to come,
that change these
types of systems,
that move from the domination
to the partnership.
And that's how you do it, is by
putting those practical tools
into people's hands.
>>EISLER: Yes.
>>LISA: And the
leadership organization
that you have as well-- I mean,
the curriculum that you have
as well-- tell me a
little bit about that.
>>EISLER: Well, we have a
program for leadership training
to really change
economic structures,
economic policies,
economic practices.
It's an online program.
You don't have to
leave your home,
don't have to leave
your chair, to take it.
And it's nine weeks, one
and a half hours a week.
And it's a fabulous program.
And I invite people to check
it out at partnershipway.org.
And you can find it when
you see those circles.
>>LISA: The circle of chairs.
Yes, and we're
going to be covering
that a little bit later.
But it's very
important to-- again,
to be able to put
these tools and to make
them practical for people.
>>EISLER: We also have a
wonderful caring and connected
parenting guide for the first
four years-- zero to four--
>>LISA: Oh really?
>>EISLER: --based on
the latest neuroscience.
So you're quite right, Lisa.
There's a tremendous amount
of practical information
that can be used and adapted.
>>LISA: Yes,
absolutely, right away.
What is the-- just
curious-- the zero to four.
It really starts
there, doesn't it?
>>EISLER: It not
only starts there,
we know now from
neuroscience that those
are the most important years.
And that's why it's so shocking
that ours is the only developed
nation that does not offer
paid parental leave--
government supported--
that does not
offer high quality early
childhood education.
And we're going to
really pay very dearly
if we don't change that course.
Because we cannot compete in
the post-industrial era without
investing in the capacity
development of our children.
And as we know, it
starts from zero to four.
>>LISA: So are you
saying that there
needs to be an education
in place from zero to four?
>>EISLER: I think that what
we need are policies that--
>>LISA: Support parents.
>>EISLER: Certainly, we
need parenting education.
Because what used to be
sound parenting education--
and that's still being peddled--
is dominator education.
>>LISA: It is.
>>EISLER: Terrorizing a child
to accept that the parent's
will is law is perfect
for domination systems.
It's terrible for a
democracy, isn't it?
>>LISA: It's very true.
And I agree with you.
But then, you still need
to be able to give children
boundaries, because that's
the most important--
>>EISLER: Oh, absolutely.
>>LISA: And it's
not without that.
>>EISLER: I speak
of the difference
between authoritative and
authoritarian-- big difference.
And we need teachers,
we need parents,
we need loci of authority.
But the question,
again-- we're back
to "The Chalice and the Blade."
Is the power going to be
disempowering or empowering?
And the fact that in
the corporate literature
we now read about
empowering employees--
is very much, again,
another partnership trend.
>>LISA: Yes and that's--
>>EISLER: More rhetoric than
reality sometimes, but at least
we're changing the perception.
>>LISA: In the
smaller companies,
it's definitely reality.
But yes, in the larger companies
it tends to just be on paper.
But that's very
interesting, though,
about the authoritarian
versus authority.
And that's a very, very
clear distinction there,
because it gives
children boundaries.
>>EISLER: They must
have boundaries.
Children-- they're
learning about--
>>LISA: Where they
fit in the world.
>>EISLER: Where they fit in the
world, about what's dangerous
and what's good, what's bad.
That whole relativism that's so
fashionable in so many new age
circles about
don't be judgmental
is a straight line back into the
domination-- terrible, punitive
morality.
People need standards.
And if we say everything
goes, everything
is relative-- there's
a big difference
between understanding
why somebody bought
into-- like the women
in Iran I spoke about.
We can understand why they were
socialized to believe this,
but that doesn't mean
that we agree with it.
>>LISA: What do you
mean by judgmental?
>>EISLER: By
judgemental I mean we
have to make a judgment
as to whether something
is right or wrong.
>>LISA: I see.
>>EISLER: And I think it's wrong
to send your children ahead
of an army to explode the
mines, right, and to die.
>>LISA: So you think the free
parenting thinking, where
parents raise their children
with more free philosophies,
is not necessarily healthy?
>>EISLER: Not necessarily, no.
You see, what
happens so often is
you get rebellion rather
than reconstruction.
My work is about
deconstruction, certainly,
about understanding what
the problem really is.
But it's not about
rebelling against it,
which is what the
free parenting was.
>>LISA: The parents do.
>>EISLER: It's about
reconstructing.
And that's what the Caring
and Connected Parenting
Guide is about.
It is not about the child
becoming the dominator.
>>LISA: That's very true.
That's very true.
And I-- yes, I can see how that
would make a big difference.
We've done both sides
of that parenting model.
And I see the one
with the boundaries
works so much better.
>>EISLER: Well, because we
are really relearning so much.
And that's what-- but we
have to unlearn and learn
something new.
>>LISA: Such a beautiful
way of saying that.
You have a beautiful way
of say things, Riane.
All right, what
we're going to do
is we're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're going
to talk more about the social
and the economical
perspectives of all this,
and how it goes into
a caring economy,
and how those two words
actually work together.
We'll be right back.
Welcome back.
My guest is social
scientist Riane Eisler.
And we're speaking
about so many things,
with the domination
versus partnership model
and how that occurs
everywhere in our society,
between education and media.
And right now
we're going to talk
about how it appears
in our economics.
You mentioned something in your
work called caring economics.
What exactly is that?
What is a caring economics?
>>EISLER: Don't we
do a double take just
hearing caring and economics
in the same sentence?
>>LISA: It's an
oxymoron, kind of.
>>EISLER: But should it be?
Isn't that a terrible
comment, Lisa--
>>LISA: I know, true.
>>EISLER: No, think
about it-- on how
we've been taught that
uncaring values should
drive our economic systems.
Economic systems are
supposed-- supposed to--
>>LISA: Support us.
>>EISLER: That's right.
>>LISA: You're right.
>>EISLER: So--
>>LISA: We have gone
so far away from that.
>>EISLER: Well, and
there's a reason for that.
And it has to do with what
we've been talking about,
which is domination
or partnership.
Because economics don't
arise in a vacuum.
They arise in a context.
And we still have so
many domination elements.
And part of the
domination system,
if you remember from
that clip, is the ranking
of the male half of humanity
over the female half.
>>LISA: Historically, yes.
>>EISLER: Historically.
And with this comes a very
gendered system of values,
where anything that's
stereotypically associated
with women or the feminine--
caring, care giving,
nonviolence-- is
devalued, whether it's
in a woman or a man.
If a man-- he's a sissy
in the old system, right?
He's a wimp.
He's effeminate.
Why should effeminate
be an insult?
But think about it.
And it's also devalued in our
economic and business policy.
Once we become aware
of this, again,
a lot of things that don't seem
to make any sense-- after all,
why shouldn't we
really support caring
for people and for
nature-- come into play.
It's because we've
been socialized
that that's women's work.
And in the old domination
system, being a man
is not being like
a woman, right?
>>LISA: That's interesting.
That's an interesting
way of looking at it.
>>EISLER: Yeah, so now that
the gender stereotypes--
and we're talking about
stereotypes, by the way.
So now we can see fathers who
are fathering the way that
used to be unfit for real
men-- diapering a baby,
feeding a baby.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>EISLER: And it's only as the
status of women rose that men--
>>LISA: Have risen
to the occasion more.
>>EISLER: That's right.
Because they don't
feel that it's
such a devaluation of
them, of their status,
to embrace something more
stereotypically feminine.
So gender is a
big, ignored piece
that we had better look at.
And I always make
the point which
is, people are uncomfortable
talking about gender.
But then, let's remember what
the great sociologist Louis
Wirth said.
He said the most important
things about a society
are those that people
don't want to talk about.
We saw it with race, didn't we?
>>LISA: Yes, yes, right.
>>EISLER: And we're
seeing it with gender.
>>LISA: Now it's gender, yes.
>>EISLER: Only when
we talk about it,
when we put it out
in the open, can
we actually understand how
the dots are connected.
>>LISA: My aunt was in a
great movie called "Mr. Mom"
a long time ago.
And again, it was
20 years ago where
that type of-- Michael
Keaton and Teri Garr.
They were in it in the--
it was all about that,
it was all about how the
male was taking over.
And it was an important
movie at the time.
Because it really
wasn't being done then.
It's being done
so much more now.
So let's talk a little
bit about caring economics
and how those two
relate together.
And we're going to take a
look at some slides here.
Making the economic case for
caring-- what exactly is that?
>>EISLER: Well--
>>LISA: How children and
business and citizens
all need to work together,
or become one, and return
on that investment.
>>EISLER: Well, it's a
huge return on investment.
And that's what
we've got to show.
And that's why we have, at the
Center for Partnership Studies,
launched the caring
economy campaign.
And we're soon going to
have-- the campaign will soon
have its own website,
caringeconomy.com.
And it will have a coalition of
major national organizations--
women's organizations certainly,
children's organizations,
think tanks, faith
organizations.
Because we have
to work together.
But we also have this training
program that I told you about.
>>LISA: Yes, which is--
now, when people create
these types of policies,
when they create policies
where they're caring
for each other,
it changes the system
of our economics
because there are certain
organizations who have taken
on some of these caring
economics models.
You give, for example,
some organizations
that supply child care-- back
up child care programs-- that
actually are more successful.
They have--
>>EISLER: Well, this is--
I bring out again, again,
in "The Real Wealth of Nations."
And it's information
that is up to us.
We have to change
the conversation.
Because people will tell you,
well, caring, that soft, fuzzy,
feminine stuff--
it's not effective.
The reality is that it
is enormously effective.
And we have study after
study now showing that.
For example, the companies that
regularly appear in the Fortune
500 or the Working Mothers
as the best companies to work
for, they have more caring
policies-- child care,
good health care,
paid parental leave.
They have a higher, a
significantly higher,
return to investors.
It makes sense.
When people feel that they and
their families are cared for,
they're going to
work very hard so
that that company is successful.
>>LISA: They feel
supported, so therefore they
support the company.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
And it happens not only
on the business level,
but on the national level.
And I think that we're going
to be talking about that.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
So well, let's actually
talk about that now.
On the national level,
how would that affect us?
We see that in corporations
like we just saw, but how would
it affect us at
a national level?
>>EISLER: Well, we have
models for that, too.
>>LISA: Good.
>>EISLER: It's all there,
if we just really look
in terms of the lenses of the
partnership versus domination,
of a caring or uncaring
economy, that go with each.
As I said, there's
been a movement
towards the
partnership side, or we
wouldn't have, for
example, child labor laws.
Or we wouldn't have
any of the things
that we have--
safety regulations.
Because in pure domination
systems, well, you had slavery.
The Greeks, for
example, with all
of their-- the
Athenians, with all
of their talk about democracy,
they were a slave society.
There were no protections there.
But as we have
moved, some nations
have been in the forefront.
And these have been
nations like Sweden,
like Finland, like Norway, like
Iceland-- which, by the way,
have recovered.
Except-- Iceland
the bankers did in,
but they have
recovered, all of them,
from the recession,
the great recession,
much better than
the United States.
And one of the
reasons is that they
have invested in their people.
Now, these nations--
think about it.
At the beginning of
the 20th century,
they were so poor that
there were famines.
Whole states got populated--
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>EISLER: --Minnesota.
Today they are invariably
in the highest ranks,
not only of the human
development reports
of the United Nations, but
of the World Economic Forum's
global competitiveness reports.
So what happened?
One of the main reasons
is that, as I said,
they moved to a caring economy.
They have a mix of socialism,
yes, of central planning,
and a very healthy
market economy.
But they often call
themselves caring societies.
They have very generous
paid parental leave.
They have-- for both mothers
and fathers, by the way.
>>LISA: There's a clip that
we have that the Center
for Partnership Studies
put together of a study
that they specifically
did around this.
And it's Men and Women and
the Global Equality of Life.
>>EISLER: We did that
study at the Center
for Partnership Studies.
It's Women, Men, and the
Global Quality of Life.
And it documents
something that it's really
our job to make
people understand.
I'm going to start by giving
you some empirical evidence
of this.
I'm going to start with
some statistical studies.
We, at the Center for
Partnership Studies, which
is the organization, the not for
profit, that I'm president of,
did a study comparing
two bundles of measures
from 89 nations in our world.
One bundle looked
at quality of life.
The other bundle looked
at the status of women.
So we were looking at
matters in quality of life
all the way from
infant mortality,
to the gap between income
on top and on bottom,
to human rights ratings,
environmental ratings.
And we found, in
this study, which
is called Women, Men, and
the Global Quality of Life,
that the status of women
can, in significant respects,
be a better predictor of
the general quality of life
of a society than GDP.
Which is of course the
conventional measure that we
all keep being told would
measure economic health.
And that's not the only study.
The World Values
Surveys-- in 2000,
they finally decided
to look at gender.
And they found that those
world regions-- and this
was, again, a study of values
worldwide-- that those world
regions where the
status of women
is higher, where women are not
viewed as having to be confined
under male control in the
household, that not only
was there a higher
quality of life,
but more civil rights
and more democracy.
A third study-- and
again, these are
all quantitative,
statistical studies--
is the gender gap study
that is now annually being
done by the World
Economic Forum.
And again, if you
look at the findings,
you see that those nations
that have the smallest gender
gap-- because unfortunately,
every nation in our world
still has one-- that those
are the nations where there
is a higher general
quality of life.
Now, why is this?
Of course, there
are many reasons.
One is very simple.
Women are half the population.
But not only are we
half the population,
but we are the
half that is still
entrusted with caring
for young children.
So when a society deprives,
as so many world cultures
still do, with traditions
of horrible discrimination
against girls and women--
not only equal health care,
equal food, equal
education, we're really
affecting future
generations, aren't we?
Well, I think this whole thing
about the status of women--
remember, when
you saw that clip,
that that's one of
the components that
is very important in
whether a society orients
to the domination system
or the partnership system.
And in these Nordic nations
that we just talked about,
women are 40%--
four zero percent--
of the national legislature.
>>LISA: Wow, amazing.
>>EISLER: All right, well,
we should be 50%, really.
We're half the population.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: But the
point of it is this:
it's not only women who voted
for more caring policies-- men.
It's because as the
status of women rises,
men no longer feel it's such
a threat to their status,
to their quote,
masculinity, to embrace
these more feminine,
more caring policies.
And this did not
happen in a vacuum.
I really want to say this.
It happened because
these nations moved more
to the partnership side.
They have much more
democracy and equality
in both the family
and the state.
>>LISA: So there's not as
much of a gender gap there.
>>EISLER: Not as
much of a gender
gap, but that's not
the only factor.
For example, they also
are in the forefront
in the world--
remember when I said
force fear is part of
a domination system?
It keeps it together?
They're at the
forefront of trying
to leave those
traditions behind.
The first peace studies came
out of the Nordic nations.
The first laws saying
that it's against the law
to use physical discipline
against children and families--
>>LISA: Came out of
the Nordic nations?
>>EISLER: Yes, and they also
have a very strong men's
movement to disentangle quote,
masculinity, from its dominator
entanglement with
domination, with violence,
that that's the real man.
So it's because they've
moved in that direction.
But again, if we really
still marginalize
these so-called women's
issues, we're missing the boat.
We can't understand that it's--
as long as women are ranked
as inferior to men, as long as
men are supposed to dominate
women, which is what
a lot of the gender--
the war of the sexes
is about, really.
Women manipulate,
because they're not
supposed to control.
But as long as women are
devalued, so also will
these stereotypically
feminine, caring, care giving,
nonviolence-- it's not realistic
to expect more caring policies
as long as we don't really
globally, globally raise
the status of women.
Now, the good news
is that there's now
a Global Women's Movement.
>>LISA: How is that
affecting the United States?
>>EISLER: Well, the
United States, of course,
has been in a regression.
Whereas all the other
industrialized nations
have been moving more
towards caring policies,
we have been moving
back from them.
And this whole-- really, it's a
red herring about the deficit.
Because it's a
question of priorities.
Do we give corporate
welfare or do
we invest in early
childhood education?
Now, I want to make a
very important point here,
because I always
believe that you've
got to show people who are
very much in this old paradigm
that caring is successful.
And as we move-- and
this is really basic--
we are moving into a whole
new technological age,
the so-called
post-industrial era,
from the manufacturing era.
Robotics is coming down
the road, automation.
A lot of the manufacturing
jobs never will come back.
Economists never
tire of telling us
that the most important capital
for this knowledge service
post-industrial economy is
high quality, human capital.
As we discussed, it
starts in early childhood.
If we don't invest in
caring for our children,
in parenting education, in
high quality early childhood
education, in paid parental
leave, in health care,
in-- this country has the
highest child poverty rates,
this wealthy United States,
of any developed nation,
as well as the highest
maternal mortality rates.
>>LISA: I knew that, yes.
>>EISLER: Now, what
does that tell us?
>>LISA: Undervalued.
>>EISLER: The nations that
I'm talking about now--
Sweden, Finland, Norway--
have very low poverty rates,
very low woman
headed poverty rates,
woman-headed family
poverty rates.
>>LISA: Do you attribute
that to the fact
that that is more of a
female-dominated system?
>>EISLER: It's not
female dominated.
Women are only 40%, anyway.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>EISLER: It's hardly that.
I attribute that to
the fact that they've
moved to more gender equity,
to more gender balance,
and to the fact that they've
moved more to the partnership
configuration, of which
gender is an important piece.
And I think we really have
to pay attention to that.
Because those nations have
very successful economies
and very low crime
rates, for example.
And I started to
say that they have
a lot of woman-headed families.
We're always being
told that that's
the problem with poverty.
But they have very low,
very low poverty rates
for woman-headed
families because they
have the social
support for caring.
>>LISA: Women-headed families
meaning that the female is
the primary--
>>EISLER: That's
right, that's right.
>>LISA: --earner.
I understand.
OK, so now in the
United States, though,
we have dual-income families,
many, many-- so this is--
>>EISLER: So also in Sweden
and Norway, by the way.
>>LISA: But what we
don't have is the systems
that support the
dual-income families?
>>EISLER: That's really
what we're talking about,
is do we support
caring and care giving?
Do we have caring policies?
And I think that we
better understand
that we have to start with
different measures of what
is economically productive.
And that's something
that we're working
on through our Center for
Partnership Studies Caring
Economy Campaign.
Because the old measures--
GDP, Gross Domestic Product--
are crazy.
They include activities
that harm and take life.
>>LISA: Explain that.
>>EISLER: Making cigarettes--
the medical costs,
the funeral costs--
they're all great for GDP.
Oil spills-- wonderful for
GDP-- the cleanup costs,
the lawsuits.
But not only-- and this is
the point, now-- not only
do these old measures include
as positive negatives,
they fail to include
as productive work
in their measures of so-called
economic health the most
important human work,
the life-sustaining work.
So I've proposed, really, a
full spectrum economic map
that doesn't just include
the market, the government,
and the legal economy, but that
also includes the household
economy, the unpaid
volunteer economy,
and the natural economy.
>>LISA: Yes, very important to
include-- very, very important
to include.
How do you think that our media
shapes women in the world,
here in the US specifically?
And how does that compare
to other countries?
>>EISLER: Well, of course, we've
exported a lot of our media.
So by now I don't think
that any country--
>>LISA: Oh, that's true.
Yes, this is true.
Yes.
>>EISLER: --is immune from us.
But I'll tell you, years
ago when I was in Denmark--
I don't know what
the situation is now.
It's one of those nations,
the Nordic nations,
that are doing so much better,
have more equality, et cetera.
>>LISA: More progressive, yes.
>>EISLER: They didn't show
the kind of television
that we show.
>>LISA: They didn't.
>>EISLER: But probably
by today they do.
>>LISA: Well I notice
when I-- as I said,
I have a young child.
And I-- on my drive to school
I've had to change my route
because there are pornography
ads on the side of the road.
There's even network
television ads
that are showing more and
more examples of women just
being symbols rather than
human beings any longer.
So I can only avoid
those routes for so long.
There has to be a
conversation that goes along
with it, that has to
explain to my young daughter
that a woman is more
than a sex symbol.
>>EISLER: You know,
the objectification
of the human beings is part
of the domination system.
It's an instrumental view
of another human being, one
that you can control.
It unfortunately is not new.
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
>>EISLER: This is
something that--
>>LISA: It's just the
line has gotten blurred.
It's been pushed
more and more lately.
>>EISLER: Well, it's
an interesting thing.
As I wrote in my book,
"Sacred Pleasure,"
the so-called sexual
revolution had two sides.
It had a very healthy side,
which was yeah, sex is normal.
Sex is pleasurable.
Sex is--
>>LISA: Good.
>>EISLER: Yeah,
as long as there--
I actually proposed,
in that book,
that we need an ethic for sexual
relations of at least some
modicum of caring
for each other.
Because all's fair in love
and war is a dominator--
>>LISA: Model, yes.
>>EISLER: --model.
But the thing about it
is that there was also
a very unhealthy part
of that, which was still
within the domination
system, that for example,
the whole thing
became well, women
have to be available
at all times to men.
And now, with this
terrible sexualization
of little girls-- and I'm
afraid our corporations
are very much to blame
for a lot of that.
>>LISA: Why?
>>EISLER: Well, because
they make money off it.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>EISLER: And they
manipulate and market.
But see, they couldn't
be so successful--
and this is where we
really have to understand--
if we didn't have this
embedded thing that women
are sex objects.
>>LISA: That's true.
That's true-- actually, there
is a clip here that shows that.
It shows, in the media, how
many different ways that we
perceive women.
Let's take a look at that.
>>EISLER: In our
time, when so much
of the education that
young people are receiving
is not at school-- it's
from the larger culture,
and particularly from the media.
In fact, before a child
even starts school,
they've already had a huge
part of their education.
And what are they really
being educated for?
So much of what
they're educated for
is to value qualities, behaviors
appropriate for dominator
rather than partnership,
relations-- qualities
and behaviors that
cause so many problems.
Think about in action
entertainment, in the news.
What do we focus on?
Violence, killing, hurting.
You look at sitcoms, and so much
of them-- they seem innocent,
but they make cruelty, cynicism,
insensitivity seem fun.
>>JERRY SEINFELD: Well you see,
the thing of it is, you know,
there's a lot of ugly people
out there walking around,
but they don't know they're
ugly because nobody actually
tells them.
>>GEORGE COSTANZA:
So what's your point?
>>EISLER: You look at
some of the talk shows,
and they capitalize
on human suffering.
This gives young people a
very, very distorted view
of what it really
means to be human,
a very partial, one-sided view.
So schools have an enormous
responsibility here.
And yes, media literacy skill's
informed by this partnership
dominator continuum
as an analytical lens.
They're really vital
self defense strategies
for young people.
Even more so than
in the curriculum,
the gender stereotypes and the
relations between women and men
are so misrepresented.
We're led to believe
that everybody
has a wonderful time
in relations where
girls and women are humiliated.
Look at some of the
videos, the music videos.
What's the message about what
is a good relationship, what's
a fun relationship?
And this is not
only bad for girls.
It's very bad for
boys, because boys,
too-- they want that
caring connection,
that good
relationship-- can't get
that in that kind
of relationship.
>>LISA: How do you
think that this
has changed the way that men
relate to women, in general?
>>EISLER: Well, I don't think
it has really changed it.
Let me start with that.
Because if you go back--
every once in a while,
I read an old novel, and
I was reading Trollope.
They've done some
of his work on PBS.
And women were totally
under the control of men.
>>LISA: This is not new.
>>EISLER: This is not new.
What's new is the overt
sexualization of it.
But even that isn't new.
If you look, for
example, at Greek vases,
you see scenes of intercourse.
If you look at some of the
art that was commissioned
by inquisitors in
the Middle Ages,
you see the same kind of
torture of naked women
as you do in some of this
horrible modern pornography.
>>LISA: But there was also
the historical statues and art
of women being
displayed as beautiful
and nurturing and feminine.
We have a few of
these clips that you
shared with us,
of the goddesses.
>>EISLER: Well those, of
course, come from times
before the shift.
So you have to understand that--
for example, in that procession
fresco, you have a
woman, a high priestess,
with priestesses and priests
coming with offerings of wine
and of food.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EISLER: But what
does that tell you?
It tells you a lot about
the kind of structure.
She isn't on a high pedestal.
They're not groveling, kneeling,
or prostrating themselves.
It's more of a partnership
society, isn't it?
And the fact that a woman can
be the high priestess-- how
does that compare
to what happened
after the shift, when
only men could be popes.
And we're beginning to reverse
it, but much, much too slowly.
>>LISA: You speak of this shift.
What are you talking about?
>>EISLER: I'm speaking about the
shift from more of an earlier
partnership direction
in civilization,
in prehistory,
that I really write
about quite a bit in "The
Chalice and the Blade"
and in "Sacred Pleasure."
By the way, "Chalice"
is now in 25 languages.
>>LISA: That's amazing, yes.
>>EISLER: The most
recent translations
have been into
Urdu, for Pakistan.
>>LISA: Oh my gosh,
that's amazing.
>>EISLER: And it was
just acquired for Turkey.
So look, there are people
all over the world trying
to shift to the
partnership side.
>>LISA: It's a textbook in
many universities, absolutely.
>>EISLER: They're trying to
shift to the partnership side.
And this hidden history
is very helpful.
If you, for example, look at
the Venus of Laussel, which
was one of the slides,
the cave painting--
if we could have that
one for just a moment.
It's the next one, next one,
the next one after this.
There we are.
Now that comes-- it's from the
Paleolithic, or the Old Stone
Age.
That's about 20,000
to 25,000 years old.
That was before the shift.
The Minoan images that you saw
are about 10,000 years ago.
But what's so interesting
is she's nude.
But there is nothing degrading
about her nakedness, is there?
>>LISA: No, and it
shows the uterus
as being whole and
full and beautiful.
>>EISLER: And it also
shows her holding a moon.
And, you know, she's
engraved at the opening
of a cave sanctuary.
So it must have been some
kind of a ritual connecting
women's menstrual cycles
with the cycles of the moon.
>>LISA: Where it used to be
the sacred feminine, yes.
>>EISLER: That's right.
So it's a whole different
kind of a thing, isn't it?
>>LISA: So now we
have pornography,
we have nighttime
episodic shows that
are no longer family shows.
How are we explaining
or portraying women?
>>EISLER: Well, terribly.
Terribly is the short answer.
>>LISA: And how do we
teach this to young women?
How do we teach young
girls about their bodies?
>>EISLER: Well, I think
that it is something
that is up to every
one of us to do.
And there are tools for it.
"Tomorrow's Children" has
a lot on media literacy.
There's a new film called
"Miss Representation," which
deals with how we are portrayed.
Look, women have to be
portrayed as human beings.
Sex is a wonderful part of
life, for both women and men.
Women aren't just objects.
Women are really active sexual
partners given half a chance,
and sex is so much
better that way.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>EISLER: All the
studies show that.
So the old model really doesn't
particularly work for anybody.
But, it's what we've inherited.
And it's being accentuated
now through this.
And there's a big
difference between erotica
and pornography.
>>LISA: Explain.
>>EISLER: Well, erotica
is to simply focus
on the healthy, pleasure
giving, mutual pleasure giving.
Pornography usually
has something
to do with at best
objectifying a woman,
or in gay pornography,
the man who plays
the part of the female
in the relationship,
and at worst dominating,
brutally beating, killing,
torturing.
>>LISA: It's back
to the domination.
>>EISLER: It's back to that.
So it isn't sex
that's the problem.
It's the domination element.
>>LISA: It's so interesting.
Because it really
has shaped, though,
the way that women and
men relate to each other,
even in relationships,
in parenting,
across the board-- in dating.
And it does also, for
what I'm observing--
and I don't have much
experience of this-- but looking
as women are exposed,
or young girls
are being exposed
more and more and more
to sex, that they don't know how
to emotionally handle it at 13.
>>EISLER: Well, they can't.
Their brains aren't developed.
>>LISA: But yet, they're
being pressured with it.
>>EISLER: Oh my
gosh, it is really--
>>LISA: It's very confusing.
>>EISLER: It's not
only confusing.
It's immoral in the
true sense of the word.
Not because sex is immoral,
but because this brainwashing
little girls into thinking
that their whole value is
in how much they deliver
sexually to boys--
>>LISA: Yes, and that's where
they get validation and they
determine their self worth
and their societal status,
is by that validation from--
>>EISLER: Well, the only
way it's going to change
is if we take a strong stand.
And people are going to
say you're being prudish.
And the response to that is
not in the least being prudish.
We're being realistic.
We're taking into
account what we
know about brain development.
>>LISA: Self respect.
>>EISLER: The human
brain doesn't fully
develop until the early 20s.
That early, they don't have
the capacity to evaluate.
>>LISA: Or the life experience.
>>EISLER: Or the
life experience--
so this is really--
>>LISA: It's a big challenge.
>>EISLER: --unacceptable.
>>LISA: Yes, it is.
>>EISLER: And if we
had an understanding,
a public understanding,
of this and if we
didn't have this--
freedom of speech always
has to be balanced
against other interests.
>>LISA: But you know, it
also does need addressing.
Because it is happening.
It is reality that teenagers
are, at 12 and 13, having sex.
And it's all over
the Disney Channel.
It's definitely in our reality.
So do we give children,
which they still
are-- teenagers-- tools
to be able to handle that?
>>EISLER: Of course
we need sex education.
We need education that
explains the emotional issues--
that they're really
not ready for it.
Not this nonsense
about abstinence.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>EISLER: But that is this
what you really want, or do
you want a caring connection?
If you want a
satisfying relationship,
you're not going
to go in for this.
But they also need to
know the facts of life.
They're going to learn them.
My God, they're
all over the media.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>EISLER: And they need to
know about contraception.
Look, that 13-year-olds are
having sex is nothing new.
>>LISA: Right, right.
That's absolutely true.
>>EISLER: Worldwide, that
is the age of puberty,
and that's when the
hormones start raging.
>>LISA: And in some societies
marriage happens at 15, 16.
>>EISLER: Which is
really lousy for girls,
because it's usually-- that's
another total show about what--
how women's human rights--
how they're made child brides,
how genital mutilation--
all these horrible things.
Which we really
need to understand.
Because they're part of even
more rigid domination systems.
And as long as those
exist, by the way--
>>LISA: They will be acceptable.
>>EISLER: They
will be acceptable.
But they will also
reinforce the domi--
I have to make this statement,
which is when children learn
that one kind of person is
superior to another kind
of person-- that beginning with
the most fundamental difference
in humans, between
female and male,
difference is to be equated
with either superiority
or inferiority, with
dominating or being dominated,
with being served or serving--
that is in their heads.
It's a template for a different
race being treated that way,
for a different ethnic group
being treated that way.
Any difference then becomes
equated with either superiority
or inferiority.
We've got to get back to
gender to really understand
that this is an early
model for relations.
And if we don't
change that, we will
continue to have
domination systems.
>>LISA: Well, but let's go back
to the conversation we were
having about boundaries,
and about parenting styles,
and about how the
gender gap is closing,
where men are becoming
more responsible.
>>EISLER: That's the
partnership movement.
>>LISA: That's the
There still has
to be the-- where
do you have that
fine line, though,
between domination and
boundaries, domination
and teaching children
what's right from wrong?
There's different
styles of parenting
between men and women.
>>EISLER: I make a distinction
between hierarchies
of domination-- we
know all of those.
And we do need new
language, by the way,
because everybody says--
>>LISA: Especially for men.
>>EISLER: --heirarchy is bad.
Well, we always
have hierarchies.
We have parents.
We have teachers.
We have managers.
We have leaders.
The question is, will it be
a hierarchy of domination?
And we know that one-- you
better obey the orders,
or there's going to
be a lot of pain.
>>LISA: Right.
Or will it be a hierarchy
of actualization,
where-- look, in a hierarchy of
actualization, accountability,
respect, benefit doesn't
just flow from the bottom up.
It flows both ways.
>>LISA: That's
true, that's true.
>>EISLER: So a parent
is accountable,
as we're seeing today, as we're
seeing more and more exposure
of child abuse, including
child sexual abuse.
This is not new; it's just
that it used to be ignored--
>>LISA: Kept quiet.
>>EISLER: Kept quiet.
So yes, we do need to
have those boundaries.
But will it be
empowering to the child,
or is it a matter
of just-- there
are some times when you've
got to control a kid.
A child is about to
run into traffic.
This is no time--
>>LISA: To be exercising--
>>EISLER: --to start explaining
everything or being gentle.
You just yank, OK?
>>LISA: Right, out of safety.
>>EISLER: Yeah.
>>LISA: You know who I really
think needs a new education,
or vocabulary, or support,
are the male-- are
the fathers of children--
male fathers-- are
the fathers of children that
are also sharing that role.
It has now become such a more
equal role between men taking
care of children and women
taking care of children,
equally, that I believe that
fathers need more support
in terms of their emotional
vocabulary around a less
domination--
>>EISLER: Oh, absolutely.
>>LISA: --model, and now
more of a partnership model,
where it comes to
raising children equally.
>>EISLER: I think that
the language, again,
makes a big difference.
By the grace of evolution,
both women and men-- not just
females-- receive
neurochemical rewards
of pleasure, endorphins,
when we-- not only
when we're cared for, but
when we care for another,
be it a child, a lover, a pet.
We've all felt it.
So the old model,
where the man had
to be the distant
disciplinarian--
>>LISA: Never change a diaper.
>>EISLER: Wait til your
father gets home, right?
That's the pure dominator model.
They were losing a lot of their
humanity and that pleasure.
So I think that
this is something
that is not a question
of women against men
or men against women.
It's a question of both women
and men really attaining
our full humanity.
Women can be leaders, which they
can't be under the old model.
Women can be assertive without
being told that they're
ball-breaking bitches
and all of the rest.
And men can be
caring without being
told that they're
wimps and sissies.
>>LISA: We just don't have
very many models of that.
>>EISLER: Well, we do.
We're beginning to.
But unfortunately, the
old dominator models
are still strong.
But look around you.
You probably find
people who have it.
I am very blessed.
I have it in my own marriage
with my husband, who
happens to be a very caring man.
And some women aren't
caring, by the way.
So this is really not an
issue of sex, but of gender
stereotypes.
>>LISA: I was
thinking about you.
You're a wonderful
example of a woman
who is incredibly strong, very
knowledgeable-- incredibly
knowledgeable-- and yet feminine
and loving at the same time.
You're a beautiful
model of that.
>>EISLER: Thank you.
>>LISA: You're someone
that I look up to so much,
to be able to embody
all that you do,
with all of your
knowledge, and yet still be
so warm and nurturing and
a mother and a grandmother,
is a beautiful example
for many people.
I wish to find more
women like you.
And they are, yes, absolutely,
out there-- absolutely out
there.
>>EISLER: And there
are men out there.
And I think that my
husband, David Loye,
who's a wonderful social
scientist and the writer
of many wonderful
books-- we wrote a book
together called "The
Partnership Way."
And it has a lot of tools.
And one of the tools has been
used by a lot of schools.
>>LISA: It's a great parenting
book, by the way, too.
>>EISLER: Yeah, it is.
But it has a lot of
tools for schools.
And one of them is
looking at the media
through the lenses of the
partnership and domination
continuum and looking for
dominator or partnership
heroes.
>>LISA: Oh, good idea.
>>EISLER: --or dominator
or partnership heroines.
And there are
beginning to be a few.
But the majority of
what's out there--
especially American films.
Interestingly, European
films have much more--
more like women can be strong.
>>LISA: They can be the heroine?
Do you have any examples that
come to mind in our culture,
in the US, of women who have
more of a partnership model?
>>EISLER: Well,
you mean actual--
>>LISA: That are in the media.
That are in the media, yes.
>>EISLER: In the media.
Well, for some reason I
thought of Jane Fonda, who
really left Ted Turner because--
>>LISA: Right.
There are many, if
you start to look.
Yes, absolutely.
>>EISLER: But the woman
who did the film, Newsom,
the wife of the mayor of--
former mayor of San Francisco.
He's now lieutenant governor.
She's the one who did
"Miss Representation."
They seem to have a
partnership relationship.
The Clintons seem to have
a partnership relationship,
despite his terrible
sexual addiction.
>>LISA: Yeah,
that's brave to say.
>>EISLER: Yeah, but he
respects her as a human being.
He didn't respect her as a wife.
>>LISA: Do you
know that for sure?
>>EISLER: I think
so, because he really
has supported her career.
And that's really what we want.
We want both men and women
to be able to express
their full humanity, to express
their capacities for creating,
for working outside
of the home--
>>LISA: For being leaders.
>>EISLER: --for
being leaders, at
the same time that they can
express their capacities
for caring and for nurturing
and for that caring connection
that we all so yearn for.
That it is not possible
in a domination system--
only possible as
we empower women,
as we move more towards
the partnership side.
>>LISA: Yes.
There is an example
here in this next clip
of how the mother
and the child bond
has been kind of deleted
from certain situations,
where you can see this here.
And it gives us an example.
>>EISLER: I want
young people to have
the benefit of the new
scholarship on evolution,
scholarship that shows the
importance of cooperation, not
just fierce competition,
in evolution.
I think that they're entitled
to know that women were there,
which you really
wouldn't know if you look
at the conventional texts
and at the museum dioramas.
We're just not present.
That in fact, mother
child bonds were
one of the most
important aspects
of the evolution of love.
Because by the
grace of evolution,
we humans receive biochemical
rewards of enormous pleasure,
not only when we are
loved or cared for,
but also when we love or care
for another, be it a child,
be it a friend, be it a
lover, be it even a pet.
We all have experienced
this, but it's
left out of the
conventional narratives.
And it needs to be put in.
And we're back, really,
to "Tomorrow's Children"
and to what I call teaching
meaningful evolution,
showing it contrary to what
we see so much emphasized
to our capacity for
violence-- which
we have, as human
beings, women, too.
>>LISA: It's part
of survival, yes.
>>EISLER: Well,
it's part of-- today
it isn't very much
part of survival.
>>LISA: Well, an old
part of old survival.
>>EISLER: Maybe if
you were-- but we
don't have any saber tooth
tigers around the corner.
>>LISA: But our DNA
doesn't know that.
>>EISLER: Our DNA
does know that.
DNA does change.
And the thing that
counts is the interaction
of our genes with
our experiences.
And our experiences
are culturally shaped,
as mediated by families,
education, religion, politics,
economics.
>>LISA: That's a
good point, yes.
>>EISLER: Everything that
we've talked about-- well,
we know this from science.
>>LISA: Yes, that's true.
Epigenetics.
You are right.
>>EISLER: So we
really need to change
the way we teach
evolution and emphasize
the enormous capacity, with
the emergence of our species,
for caring, for love.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
My goodness, you have given
us such a beautiful view
of how things definitely are
possible in the way-- you're
doing it.
You're shaping change.
You're such a
visionary in this way.
And I am so grateful
that you're here
to be able to explain how
applicable this is, how it's
just an action away
from happening,
that we, by understanding our
history, can change our future,
which we talked about
at the very beginning.
I want to just touch really
quickly on the working mother
concept we were talking
about before we watched that.
How do you think the
working mother has changed
the way that we're
raising children?
>>EISLER: Well, you hear
a lot about how terrible
it is that women don't
stay home and take
care of their children.
>>LISA: I've heard that a lot.
>>EISLER: But that's
because people
don't know their history.
And they also don't
use their common sense.
If you look at the
old farm family,
that woman was not taking
care of her children.
It was usually--
>>LISA: She was working.
>>EISLER: She was working on
the field, milking the cows,
cooking for the--
>>LISA: Tending the fields, yes.
>>EISLER: And it was usually the
oldest child, the oldest girl--
>>LISA: That raised--
>>EISLER: --who took
care of the children.
And you still see that very much
in many parts of the developing
world today.
So that's a myth, the
way we never were, OK?
>>LISA: Interesting.
I love that perspective, yes.
>>EISLER: All right,
so it isn't really
the quantity, anyway, of time.
It's the quality of time.
And it's also our understanding
of what good parenting is.
And we know now that this
fear and force based parenting
is not good parenting.
>>LISA: Right, but co-parenting
is a really good solution
to that, where both the men
and the women co-parent.
>>EISLER: Absolutely.
And as I said, it's wonderful
that men now, as the gender
stereotypes are blurring,
as we're moving more
to the partnership
side, really don't
feel so threatened to
their status by going it.
>>LISA: And whereas it
comes to single mothers,
there's an economic
system that needs
to support single mothers
more by giving more
time for childcare
and more support.
>>EISLER: Absolutely, but
it needs to also support--
>>LISA: Single fathers.
>>EISLER: --and
two parent couples.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EISLER: That we are the only--
the only-- developed nation
that does not have
government supported
paid parental leave, that does
not invest in high quality
early childhood
education, that does not
have universal
childcare-- well, we
see it in the high
infant mortality rates.
We're the highest-- in
the highest poverty rates.
That's not being a superpower.
That is being really symptom of
a regression to the domination
side.
And we have to use the
current economic crisis,
where we can see that the
old system isn't working,
as an opportunity to
invest in-- just let's
put it in purely economic
terms-- in our human capital,
and give government support
for caring and care giving.
Because we're investing
in our competitiveness
as a nation in the
post-industrial knowledge
service economy.
That is a very
powerful argument.
I would like to see
the Occupy Movement
start talking about
a caring economy,
not just with what's
wrong, but what
can really, fundamentally
change the values.
Because economics is
about what we value.
>>LISA: And that is very
well put-- very well put.
And actually, you quote
Margaret Mead in this next clip.
She says it very well, as well.
Let's just take a look
at that really quickly.
>>EISLER: I want to close
by reminding us of something
that Margaret Mead pointed out,
that the only thing that ever
brought about positive change
is a group of dedicated women
and men.
So let's be that group of
dedicated women and men.
Let's join together to
really make that difference,
to send a steady stream of
pressure and information
and, yes, new thinking to our
policymakers, to our neighbors,
to our friends, to everyone
in our sphere of influence.
Let's do what we
need to do to move
to that economic system
that is so urgently needed
at this critical time in human
history, an economic system
that gives visibility
and value to the most
important human work, the
work of caring for people,
starting in childhood, and
caring for our Mother Earth.
So I invite you to
join me and the Center
for Partnership Studies in
this exciting and urgently
needed enterprise.
Let's do it.
Let's do it for ourselves,
for our children,
and for generations to come.
I thank you.
>>LISA: And let's
do it together.
Yes, I'm so inspired by that.
And I'm so inspired by
you, and motivated as well.
And you have opened
my mind to so many
wonderful possibilities.
I so appreciate you.
I really do.
>>EISLER: Oh, well
thank you my dear Lisa.
>>LISA: And I thank you.
I thank you for your
work, and for all
that you've given to us, and
the perspectives that you shared
with us this afternoon,
and everything
that you've done to move us
forward for social change.
You are really one
of the true pioneers.
But you're also one of
the ones making it happen.
So thank you.
Thank you so much.
>>EISLER: Thank you.
>>LISA: So wonderful.
And thank you so much for
being a part of this, too.
If you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Riane Eisler or if you want
to share it with some friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And for lots more
thought-provoking interviews
and inspirational
films and a lot more,
please sign up for a free
trial by going to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]